# 

Created at 2024/12/21 8:45 AM

Daniel Durrant in 2010

epoch or date whence any people begin to compute their time. *Black's Law Dictionary,* 2d ed. (St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing, 1910)

the epoch or date from which any people begin to compute their time or dates; as, the emergent year of Christendom is that of the birth of Christ; the emergent year of the United States is that of the declaration of their independence.
Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary, published 1913 by C. & G. Merriam Co.

By beginning to answer this question, I hope to encourage thinkers to contextualize the next "emergent year" through the lenses of various disciplines, or through creative narratives, which might also feed into this inquiry.

Certainly history plays a role in this inquiry: the railroad, Sir Sandford Fleming, and the discovery of the atomic clock. Time has always been established by authorities, by decree, hasn't it? Surly there have been accounts of relating to time, via the sun and the seasons that might suggest otherwise. As of yet it seems the weights and measures have never been collectively calculated, or collectively created. So I ask, was there ever a ratification of weights and measures carried forth by people who began to "compute their time" as the Black's Law would suggest is possible?

This investigation is suitable for various debates, but a synthesis of knowledge concerning an emergent year would be preferable. Feel free to connect this meme with any disruptive discursive formation which seems to enable it: singularity, timewave zero, omega point, or even a "theory of everything" you find compelling.

The goal of asking this question is to explore arguments both for and against the resetting of calendars, the reinvention of clocks, or the deconstruction of certain time signifiers, etc. Surely these, and any number of time measurement distortions can be explored in relation to either a 'hypothetical', or a 'real' emergent year. Although I should admit, the ultimate goal I'd like to see, is a collaborative synthesis of knowledge that fits into a broader collective understanding of our relation to time, and how our consciousness may then effect it.

Indulge this question as much as you like. There might be something to it.
Feel free to contribute essential readings such as this one: http://frederickturnerpoet.com/?page_id=94

